The membrane-associated protein encoded by this gene is a member of the superfamily of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters.  ABC proteins transport various molecules across extra- and intracellular membranes.  ABC genes are divided into seven distinct subfamilies (ABC1, MDR/TAP, MRP, ALD, OABP, GCN20, White).  This protein is a member of the ABC1 subfamily.  Members of the ABC1 subfamily comprise the only major ABC subfamily found exclusively in multicellular eukaryotes.  The full transporter encoded by this gene may be involved in development of resistance to xenobiotics and engulfment during programmed cell death. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene encodes an enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of 2-arachidonoyl glycerol (2-AG), the main endocannabinoid lipid transmitter that acts on cannabinoid receptors, CB1 and CB2. The endocannabinoid system is involved in a wide range of physiological processes, including neurotransmission, mood, appetite, pain appreciation, addiction behavior, and inflammation. Mutations in this gene are associated with the neurodegenerative disease, PHARC (polyneuropathy, hearing loss, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa, and cataract), resulting from an inborn error of endocannabinoid metabolism. Alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been noted for this gene.[provided by RefSeq, Jan 2011]

This gene encodes a member of the ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloprotease domain) family. Members of this family are membrane-anchored proteins structurally related to snake venom disintegrins, and have been implicated in a variety of biological processes involving cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions, including fertilization, muscle development, and neurogenesis. The protein encoded by this gene interacts with SH3 domain-containing proteins, binds mitotic arrest deficient 2 beta protein, and is also involved in TPA-induced ectodomain shedding of membrane-anchored heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor. Several alternatively spliced transcript variants have been identified for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2010]
This gene is a member of ADAMTS (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs)-like gene family and encodes a protein with seven thrombospondin type 1 repeats. The thrombospondin type 1 repeat domain is found in many proteins with diverse biological functions including cellular adhesion, angiogenesis, and patterning of the developing nervous system. Alternate transcriptional splice variants, encoding different isoforms, have been characterized. [provided by RefSeq, Sep 2014]
The protein encoded by this gene is a mitochondrial membrane protein involved in lipid and glycerolipid metabolism. The encoded protein is a lipid kinase that catalyzes the formation of phosphatidic and lysophosphatidic acids. Defects in this gene have been associated with mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome 10. [provided by RefSeq, Feb 2012]
Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is the most severe inherited retinopathy with the earliest age of onset and accounts for at least 5% of all inherited retinal diseases. Affected individuals are diagnosed at birth or in the first few months of life with nystagmus, severely impaired vision or blindness and an abnormal or flat electroretinogram. The photoreceptor/pineal-expressed gene, AIPL1, encoding aryl-hydrocarbon interacting protein-like 1, is located within the LCA4 candidate region. The encoded protein contains three tetratricopeptide motifs, consistent with chaperone or nuclear transport activity. Mutations in this gene may cause approximately 20% of recessive LCA. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Jan 2014]
This gene encodes a member of the aldo/keto reductase superfamily, which consists of more than 40 known enzymes and proteins. This member catalyzes the reduction of a number of aldehydes, including the aldehyde form of glucose, and is thereby implicated in the development of diabetic complications by catalyzing the reduction of glucose to sorbitol. Multiple pseudogenes have been identified for this gene. The nomenclature system used by the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee to define human aldo-keto reductase family members is known to differ from that used by the Mouse Genome Informatics database. [provided by RefSeq, Feb 2009]
Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase (EC 4.1.2.13) is a tetrameric glycolytic enzyme that catalyzes the reversible conversion of fructose-1,6-bisphosphate to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate. Vertebrates have 3 aldolase isozymes which are distinguished by their electrophoretic and catalytic properties. Differences indicate that aldolases A, B, and C are distinct proteins, the products of a family of related 'housekeeping' genes exhibiting developmentally regulated expression of the different isozymes. The developing embryo produces aldolase A, which is produced in even greater amounts in adult muscle where it can be as much as 5% of total cellular protein. In adult liver, kidney and intestine, aldolase A expression is repressed and aldolase B is produced. In brain and other nervous tissue, aldolase A and C are expressed about equally. There is a high degree of homology between aldolase A and C. Defects in ALDOB cause hereditary fructose intolerance. [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2008]
Apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) sites occur frequently in DNA molecules by spontaneous hydrolysis, by DNA damaging agents or by DNA glycosylases that remove specific abnormal bases. AP sites are pre-mutagenic lesions that can prevent normal DNA replication so the cell contains systems to identify and repair such sites. Class II AP endonucleases cleave the phosphodiester backbone 5' to the AP site. This gene encodes the major AP endonuclease in human cells. Splice variants have been found for this gene; all encode the same protein. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
The protein encoded by this gene is a major apoprotein of the chylomicron. It binds to a specific liver and peripheral cell receptor, and is essential for the normal catabolism of triglyceride-rich lipoprotein constituents. This gene maps to chromosome 19 in a cluster with the related apolipoprotein C1 and C2 genes. Mutations in this gene result in familial dysbetalipoproteinemia, or type III hyperlipoproteinemia (HLP III), in which increased plasma cholesterol and triglycerides are the consequence of impaired clearance of chylomicron and VLDL remnants. [provided by RefSeq, Jun 2016]
The androgen receptor gene is more than 90 kb long and codes for a protein that has 3 major functional domains: the N-terminal domain, DNA-binding domain, and androgen-binding domain. The protein functions as a steroid-hormone activated transcription factor. Upon binding the hormone ligand, the receptor dissociates from accessory proteins, translocates into the nucleus, dimerizes, and then stimulates transcription of androgen responsive genes. This gene contains 2 polymorphic trinucleotide repeat segments that encode polyglutamine and polyglycine tracts in the N-terminal transactivation domain of its protein. Expansion of the polyglutamine tract from the normal 9-34 repeats to the pathogenic 38-62 repeats causes spinal bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA, also known as Kennedy's disease). Mutations in this gene are also associated with complete androgen insensitivity (CAIS). Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants encoding different isoforms. [provided by RefSeq, Jan 2017]
This gene encodes an integral outer mitochondrial membrane protein that blocks the apoptotic death of some cells such as lymphocytes. Constitutive expression of BCL2, such as in the case of translocation of BCL2 to Ig heavy chain locus, is thought to be the cause of follicular lymphoma. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Feb 2016]
This gene encodes a lens-specific intermediate filament-like protein named filensin. The encoded protein is expressed in lens fiber cells after differentiation has begun. This protein functions as a component of the beaded filament which is a cytoskeletal structure found in lens fiber cells. Mutations in this gene are the cause of autosomal recessive cortical juvenile-onset cataract. Alternate splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2013]
More than 99% of the vertebrate ocular lens is comprised of terminally differentiated lens fiber cells. Two lens-specific intermediate filament-like proteins, the protein product of this gene (phakinin), and filensin, are expressed only after fiber cell differentiation has begun. Both proteins are found in a structurally unique cytoskeletal element that is referred to as the beaded filament (BF). Mutations in this gene have been associated with juvenile-onset, progressive cataracts and Dowling-Meara epidermolysis bullosa simplex. [provided by RefSeq, Jun 2009]
The Bloom syndrome gene product is related to the RecQ subset of DExH box-containing DNA helicases and has both DNA-stimulated ATPase and ATP-dependent DNA helicase activities. Mutations causing Bloom syndrome delete or alter helicase motifs and may disable the 3'-5' helicase activity.  The normal protein may act to suppress inappropriate recombination. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
Inherited mutations in BRCA1 and this gene, BRCA2, confer increased lifetime risk of developing breast or ovarian cancer. Both BRCA1 and BRCA2 are involved in maintenance of genome stability, specifically the homologous recombination pathway for double-strand DNA repair. The BRCA2 protein contains several copies of a 70 aa motif called the BRC motif, and these motifs mediate binding to the RAD51 recombinase which functions in DNA repair. BRCA2 is considered a tumor suppressor gene, as tumors with BRCA2 mutations generally exhibit loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the wild-type allele. [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2008]
This gene encodes an alpha-1 subunit of a voltage-dependent calcium channel. Calcium channels mediate the influx of calcium ions into the cell upon membrane polarization. The alpha-1 subunit consists of 24 transmembrane segments and forms the pore through which ions pass into the cell. The calcium channel consists of a complex of alpha-1, alpha-2/delta, beta, and gamma subunits in a 1:1:1:1 ratio. There are multiple isoforms of each of these proteins, either encoded by different genes or the result of alternative splicing of transcripts. The protein encoded by this gene binds to and is inhibited by dihydropyridine. Alternative splicing results in many transcript variants encoding different proteins. Some of the predicted proteins may not produce functional ion channel subunits. [provided by RefSeq, Oct 2012]

The calpains, calcium-activated neutral proteases, are nonlysosomal, intracellular cysteine proteases. The mammalian calpains include ubiquitous, stomach-specific, and muscle-specific proteins. The ubiquitous enzymes consist of heterodimers with distinct large, catalytic subunits associated with a common small, regulatory subunit. This gene encodes the large subunit of the ubiquitous enzyme, calpain 1. Several transcript variants encoding two different isoforms have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Nov 2010]
Caspases are cysteine proteases that cleave C-terminal aspartic acid residues on their substrate molecules. This gene is most highly related to members of the ICE subfamily of caspases that process inflammatory cytokines. In rodents, the homolog of this gene mediates apoptosis in response to endoplasmic reticulum stress. However, in humans this gene contains a polymorphism for the presence or absence of a premature stop codon. The majority of human individuals have the premature stop codon and produce a truncated non-functional protein. The read-through codon occurs primarily in individuals of African descent and carriers have endotoxin hypo-responsiveness and an increased susceptibility to severe sepsis. Several alternatively spliced transcript variants have been noted for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Feb 2011]
This gene encodes catalase, a key antioxidant enzyme in the bodies defense against oxidative stress. Catalase is a heme enzyme that is present in the peroxisome of nearly all aerobic cells. Catalase converts the reactive oxygen species hydrogen peroxide to water and oxygen and thereby mitigates the toxic effects of hydrogen peroxide. Oxidative stress is hypothesized to play a role in the development of many chronic or late-onset diseases such as diabetes, asthma, Alzheimer's disease, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and cancers. Polymorphisms in this gene have been associated with decreases in catalase activity but, to date, acatalasemia is the only disease known to be caused by this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Oct 2009]




This gene encodes a member of the chromatin-modifying protein/charged multivesicular body protein (CHMP) protein family. The protein is part of the endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) complex III (ESCRT-III), which functions in the sorting of endocytosed cell-surface receptors into multivesicular endosomes. The ESCRT machinery also functions in the final abscisson stage of cytokinesis and in the budding of enveloped viruses such as HIV-1. The three proteins of the CHMP4 subfamily interact with programmed cell death 6 interacting protein (PDCD6IP, also known as ALIX), which also functions in the ESCRT pathway. The CHMP4 proteins assemble into membrane-attached 5-nm filaments that form circular scaffolds and promote or stabilize outward budding. These polymers are proposed to help generate the luminal vesicles of multivesicular bodies. Mutations in this gene result in autosomal dominant posterior polar cataracts.[provided by RefSeq, Oct 2009]
This gene belongs to the ATP-ases associated with diverse cellular activities (AAA+) superfamily. Members of this superfamily form ring-shaped homo-hexamers and have highly conserved ATPase domains that are involved in various processes including DNA replication, protein degradation and reactivation of misfolded proteins. All members of this family hydrolyze ATP through their AAA+ domains and use the energy generated through ATP hydrolysis to exert mechanical force on their substrates. In addition to an AAA+ domain, the protein encoded by this gene contains a C-terminal D2 domain, which is characteristic of the AAA+ subfamily of Caseinolytic peptidases to which this protein belongs. It cooperates with Hsp70 in the disaggregation of protein aggregates. Allelic variants of this gene are associated with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, which causes cataracts and neutropenia. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Apr 2015]
This gene encodes a c-Maf inducing protein that plays a role in T-cell signaling pathway. Alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been described for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Aug 2011]
This gene encodes one of the two alpha chains of type XI collagen, a minor fibrillar collagen. Type XI collagen is a heterotrimer but the third alpha chain is a post-translationally modified alpha 1 type II chain. Mutations in this gene are associated with type II Stickler syndrome and with Marshall syndrome. A single-nucleotide polymorphism in this gene is also associated with susceptibility to lumbar disc herniation. Multiple transcript variants have been identified for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Nov 2009]
This gene encodes one of the two alpha chains of type XI collagen, a minor fibrillar collagen. It is located on chromosome 6 very close to but separate from the gene for retinoid X receptor beta. Type XI collagen is a heterotrimer but the third alpha chain is a post-translationally modified alpha 1 type II chain. Proteolytic processing of this type XI chain produces PARP, a proline/arginine-rich protein that is an amino terminal domain. Mutations in this gene are associated with type III Stickler syndrome, otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED syndrome), Weissenbacher-Zweymuller syndrome, autosomal dominant non-syndromic sensorineural type 13 deafness (DFNA13), and autosomal recessive non-syndromic sensorineural type 53 deafness (DFNB53). Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. A related pseudogene is located nearby on chromosome 6. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2009]
This gene encodes the alpha-1 chain of type II collagen, a fibrillar collagen found in cartilage and the vitreous humor of the eye. Mutations in this gene are associated with achondrogenesis, chondrodysplasia, early onset familial osteoarthritis, SED congenita, Langer-Saldino achondrogenesis, Kniest dysplasia, Stickler syndrome type I, and spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia Strudwick type. In addition, defects in processing chondrocalcin, a calcium binding protein that is the C-propeptide of this collagen molecule, are also associated with chondrodysplasia. There are two transcripts identified for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene encodes a type IV collagen alpha protein. Type IV collagen proteins are integral components of basement membranes. This gene shares a bidirectional promoter with a paralogous gene on the opposite strand. The protein consists of an amino-terminal 7S domain, a triple-helix forming collagenous domain, and a carboxy-terminal non-collagenous domain. It functions as part of a heterotrimer and interacts with other extracellular matrix components such as perlecans, proteoglycans, and laminins. In addition, proteolytic cleavage of the non-collagenous carboxy-terminal domain results in a biologically active fragment known as arresten, which has anti-angiogenic and tumor suppressor properties. Mutations in this gene cause porencephaly, cerebrovascular disease, and renal and muscular defects. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2014]
This gene encodes one of the three alpha chains of type IX collagen, which is a minor (5-20%) collagen component of hyaline cartilage. Type IX collagen is usually found in tissues containing type II collagen, a fibrillar collagen. Studies in knockout mice have shown that synthesis of the alpha 1 chain is essential for assembly of type IX collagen molecules, a heterotrimeric molecule, and that lack of type IX collagen is associated with early onset osteoarthritis. Mutations in this gene are associated with osteoarthritis in humans, with multiple epiphyseal dysplasia, 6, a form of chondrodysplasia, and with Stickler syndrome, a disease characterized by ophthalmic, orofacial, articular, and auditory defects. Two transcript variants that encode different isoforms have been identified for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene encodes one of the three alpha chains of type IX collagen, the major collagen component of hyaline cartilage. Type IX collagen, a heterotrimeric molecule, is usually found in tissues containing type II collagen, a fibrillar collagen. This chain is unusual in that, unlike the other two type IX alpha chains, it contains a covalently attached glycosaminoglycan side chain. Mutations in this gene are associated with multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
The protein encoded by this gene is a metalloprotein that binds most of the copper in plasma and is involved in the peroxidation of Fe(II)transferrin to Fe(III) transferrin. Mutations in this gene cause aceruloplasminemia, which results in iron accumulation and tissue damage, and is associated with diabetes and neurologic abnormalities. Two transcript variants, one protein-coding and the other not protein-coding, have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Feb 2012]
Proteins encoded by the complexin/synaphin gene family are cytosolic proteins that function in synaptic vesicle exocytosis. These proteins bind syntaxin, part of the SNAP receptor. The protein product of this gene binds to the SNAP receptor complex and disrupts it, allowing transmitter release. Two transcript variants encoding the same protein have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene is ubiquitously expressed and is involved in the transcriptional coactivation of many different transcription factors. First isolated as a nuclear protein that binds to cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB), this gene is now known to play critical roles in embryonic development, growth control, and homeostasis by coupling chromatin remodeling to transcription factor recognition. The protein encoded by this gene has intrinsic histone acetyltransferase activity and also acts as a scaffold to stabilize additional protein interactions with the transcription complex. This protein acetylates both histone and non-histone proteins. This protein shares regions of very high sequence similarity with protein p300 in its bromodomain, cysteine-histidine-rich regions, and histone acetyltransferase domain. Mutations in this gene cause Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS). Chromosomal translocations involving this gene have been associated with acute myeloid leukemia. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants encoding different isoforms. [provided by RefSeq, Feb 2009]
This gene encodes a glycosylated extracellular matrix protein that is found in the interterritorial matrix of articular deep zone cartilage. This protein is used as a marker to distinguish chondrocytes from osteoblasts and mesenchymal stem cells in culture. The presence of FG-GAP motifs and an RGD integrin-binding motif suggests that this protein may be involved in cell-cell or cell-matrix interactions. Copy number alterations in this gene have been observed in neurofibromatosis type 1-associated glomus tumors. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Aug 2011]
Mammalian lens crystallins are divided into alpha, beta, and gamma families. Alpha crystallins are composed of two gene products: alpha-A and alpha-B, for acidic and basic, respectively. Alpha crystallins can be induced by heat shock and are members of the small heat shock protein (HSP20) family. They act as molecular chaperones although they do not renature proteins and release them in the fashion of a true chaperone; instead they hold them in large soluble aggregates. Post-translational modifications decrease the ability to chaperone. These heterogeneous aggregates consist of 30-40 subunits; the alpha-A and alpha-B subunits have a 3:1 ratio, respectively. Two additional functions of alpha crystallins are an autokinase activity and participation in the intracellular architecture. The encoded protein has been identified as a moonlighting protein based on its ability to perform mechanistically distinct functions. Alpha-A and alpha-B gene products are differentially expressed; alpha-A is preferentially restricted to the lens and alpha-B is expressed widely in many tissues and organs. Defects in this gene cause autosomal dominant congenital cataract (ADCC). [provided by RefSeq, Jan 2014]
Mammalian lens crystallins are divided into alpha, beta, and gamma families. Alpha crystallins are composed of two gene products: alpha-A and alpha-B, for acidic and basic, respectively. Alpha crystallins can be induced by heat shock and are members of the small heat shock protein (HSP20) family. They act as molecular chaperones although they do not renature proteins and release them in the fashion of a true chaperone; instead they hold them in large soluble aggregates. These heterogeneous aggregates consist of 30-40 subunits; the alpha-A and alpha-B subunits have a 3:1 ratio, respectively. Two additional functions of alpha crystallins are an autokinase activity and participation in the intracellular architecture. The encoded protein has been identified as a moonlighting protein based on its ability to perform mechanistically distinct functions. Alpha-A and alpha-B gene products are differentially expressed; alpha-A is preferentially restricted to the lens and alpha-B is expressed widely in many tissues and organs. Elevated expression of alpha-B crystallin occurs in many neurological diseases; a missense mutation cosegregated in a family with a desmin-related myopathy. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Jan 2019]
Crystallins are separated into two classes: taxon-specific, or enzyme, and ubiquitous. The latter class constitutes the major proteins of vertebrate eye lens and maintains the transparency and refractive index of the lens. Since lens central fiber cells lose their nuclei during development, these crystallins are made and then retained throughout life, making them extremely stable proteins. Mammalian lens crystallins are divided into alpha, beta, and gamma families; beta and gamma crystallins are also considered as a superfamily. Alpha and beta families are further divided into acidic and basic groups. Seven protein regions exist in crystallins: four homologous motifs, a connecting peptide, and N- and C-terminal extensions. Beta-crystallins, the most heterogeneous, differ by the presence of the C-terminal extension (present in the basic group, none in the acidic group). Beta-crystallins form aggregates of different sizes and are able to self-associate to form dimers or to form heterodimers with other beta-crystallins. This gene, a beta acidic group member, encodes two proteins (crystallin, beta A3 and crystallin, beta A1) from a single mRNA, the latter protein is 17 aa shorter than crystallin, beta A3 and is generated by use of an alternate translation initiation site. Deletion of exons 3 and 4 causes the autosomal dominant disease 'zonular cataract with sutural opacities'. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
Crystallins are separated into two classes: taxon-specific, or enzyme, and ubiquitous. The latter class constitutes the major proteins of the vertebrate eye, which function to maintain the transparency and refractive index of the lens. Since lens central fiber cells lose their nuclei during development, these crystallins are made and then retained throughout life, making them extremely stable proteins. Mammalian lens crystallins are divided into alpha, beta, and gamma families; beta and gamma crystallins are also defined as a superfamily. Alpha and beta families are further divided into acidic and basic groups. Seven protein regions exist in crystallins: four homologous motifs, a connecting peptide, and N- and C-terminal extensions. Beta-crystallins, the most heterogeneous, differ by the presence of the C-terminal extension (present in the basic group but absent in the acidic group). Beta-crystallins form aggregates of different sizes and are able to form homodimers through self-association or heterodimers with other beta-crystallins. This gene is a beta acidic group member. Three alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding identical proteins have been reported. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
Crystallins are separated into two classes: taxon-specific, or enzyme, and ubiquitous. The latter class constitutes the major proteins of vertebrate eye lens and maintains the transparency and refractive index of the lens. Since lens central fiber cells lose their nuclei during development, these crystallins are made and then retained throughout life, making them extremely stable proteins. Mammalian lens crystallins are divided into alpha, beta, and gamma families; beta and gamma crystallins are also considered as a superfamily. Alpha and beta families are further divided into acidic and basic groups. Seven protein regions exist in crystallins: four homologous motifs, a connecting peptide, and N- and C-terminal extensions. Beta-crystallins, the most heterogeneous, differ by the presence of the C-terminal extension (present in the basic group, none in the acidic group). Beta-crystallins form aggregates of different sizes and are able to self-associate to form dimers or to form heterodimers with other beta-crystallins. This gene, a beta acidic group member, is part of a gene cluster with beta-B1, beta-B2, and beta-B3. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
Crystallins are separated into two classes: taxon-specific, or enzyme, and ubiquitous. The latter class constitutes the major proteins of vertebrate eye lens and maintains the transparency and refractive index of the lens. Since lens central fiber cells lose their nuclei during development, these crystallins are made and then retained throughout life, making them extremely stable proteins. Mammalian lens crystallins are divided into alpha, beta, and gamma families; beta and gamma crystallins are also considered as a superfamily. Alpha and beta families are further divided into acidic and basic groups. Seven protein regions exist in crystallins: four homologous motifs, a connecting peptide, and N- and C-terminal extensions. Beta-crystallins, the most heterogeneous, differ by the presence of the C-terminal extension (present in the basic group, none in the acidic group). Beta-crystallins form aggregates of different sizes and are able to self-associate to form dimers or to form heterodimers with other beta-crystallins. This gene, a beta basic group member, undergoes extensive cleavage at its N-terminal extension during lens maturation. It is also a member of a gene cluster with beta-A4, beta-B2, and beta-B3. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
Crystallins are separated into two classes: taxon-specific, or enzyme, and ubiquitous. The latter class constitutes the major proteins of vertebrate eye lens and maintains the transparency and refractive index of the lens. Since lens central fiber cells lose their nuclei during development, these crystallins are made and then retained throughout life, making them extremely stable proteins. Mammalian lens crystallins are divided into alpha, beta, and gamma families; beta and gamma crystallins are also considered as a superfamily. Alpha and beta families are further divided into acidic and basic groups. Seven protein regions exist in crystallins: four homologous motifs, a connecting peptide, and N- and C-terminal extensions. Beta-crystallins, the most heterogeneous, differ by the presence of the C-terminal extension (present in the basic group, none in the acidic group). Beta-crystallins form aggregates of different sizes and are able to self-associate to form dimers or to form heterodimers with other beta-crystallins. This gene, a beta basic group member, is part of a gene cluster with beta-A4, beta-B1, and beta-B3. A chain-terminating mutation was found to cause type 2 cerulean cataracts. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
Crystallins are separated into two classes: taxon-specific, or enzyme, and ubiquitous. The latter class constitutes the major proteins of vertebrate eye lens and maintains the transparency and refractive index of the lens. Since lens central fiber cells lose their nuclei during development, these crystallins are made and then retained throughout life, making them extremely stable proteins. Mammalian lens crystallins are divided into alpha, beta, and gamma families; beta and gamma crystallins are also considered as a superfamily. Alpha and beta families are further divided into acidic and basic groups. Seven protein regions exist in crystallins: four homologous motifs, a connecting peptide, and N- and C-terminal extensions. Beta-crystallins, the most heterogeneous, differ by the presence of the C-terminal extension (present in the basic group, none in the acidic group). Beta-crystallins form aggregates of different sizes and are able to self-associate to form dimers or to form heterodimers with other beta-crystallins. This gene, a beta basic group member, is part of a gene cluster with beta-A4, beta-B1, and beta-B2. Mutations in this gene result in cataract congenital nuclear autosomal recessive type 2. [provided by RefSeq, Feb 2013]
Crystallins are separated into two classes: taxon-specific, or enzyme, and ubiquitous. The latter class constitutes the major proteins of vertebrate eye lens and maintains the transparency and refractive index of the lens. Since lens central fiber cells lose their nuclei during development, these crystallins are made and then retained throughout life, making them extremely stable proteins. Mammalian lens crystallins are divided into alpha, beta, and gamma families; beta and gamma crystallins are also considered as a superfamily. Alpha and beta families are further divided into acidic and basic groups. Seven protein regions exist in crystallins: four homologous motifs, a connecting peptide, and N- and C-terminal extensions. Gamma-crystallins are a homogeneous group of highly symmetrical, monomeric proteins typically lacking connecting peptides and terminal extensions. They are differentially regulated after early development. Four gamma-crystallin genes (gamma-A through gamma-D) and three pseudogenes (gamma-E, gamma-F, gamma-G) are tandemly organized in a genomic segment as a gene cluster. Whether due to aging or mutations in specific genes, gamma-crystallins have been involved in cataract formation. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
Crystallins are separated into two classes: taxon-specific, or enzyme, and ubiquitous. The latter class constitutes the major proteins of vertebrate eye lens and maintains the transparency and refractive index of the lens. Since lens central fiber cells lose their nuclei during development, these crystallins are made and then retained throughout life, making them extremely stable proteins. Mammalian lens crystallins are divided into alpha, beta, and gamma families; beta and gamma crystallins are also considered as a superfamily. Alpha and beta families are further divided into acidic and basic groups. Seven protein regions exist in crystallins: four homologous motifs, a connecting peptide, and N- and C-terminal extensions. Gamma-crystallins are a homogeneous group of highly symmetrical, monomeric proteins typically lacking connecting peptides and terminal extensions. They are differentially regulated after early development. Four gamma-crystallin genes (gamma-A through gamma-D) and three pseudogenes (gamma-E, gamma-F, gamma-G) are tandemly organized in a genomic segment as a gene cluster. Whether due to aging or mutations in specific genes, gamma-crystallins have been involved in cataract formation. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene encodes a member of the beta/gamma-crystallin family of proteins. Crystallins constitute the major proteins of vertebrate eye lens and maintain the transparency and refractive index of the lens. This gene and several family members are present in a gene cluster on chromosome 2. Mutations in this gene have been shown to cause multiple types of cataract, including Coppock-like cataract and zonular pulverulent cataract, among others. [provided by RefSeq, Jan 2015]
Crystallins are separated into two classes: taxon-specific, or enzyme, and ubiquitous. The latter class constitutes the major proteins of vertebrate eye lens and maintains the transparency and refractive index of the lens. Since lens central fiber cells lose their nuclei during development, these crystallins are made and then retained throughout life, making them extremely stable proteins. Mammalian lens crystallins are divided into alpha, beta, and gamma families; beta and gamma crystallins are also considered as a superfamily. Alpha and beta families are further divided into acidic and basic groups. Seven protein regions exist in crystallins: four homologous motifs, a connecting peptide, and N- and C-terminal extensions. Gamma-crystallins are a homogeneous group of highly symmetrical, monomeric proteins typically lacking connecting peptides and terminal extensions. They are differentially regulated after early development. Four gamma-crystallin genes (gamma-A through gamma-D) and three pseudogenes (gamma-E, gamma-F, gamma-G) are tandemly organized in a genomic segment as a gene cluster. Whether due to aging or mutations in specific genes, gamma-crystallins have been involved in cataract formation. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
Crystallins are separated into two classes: taxon-specific, or enzyme, and ubiquitous. The latter class constitutes the major proteins of vertebrate eye lens and maintains the transparency and refractive index of the lens. Since lens central fiber cells lose their nuclei during development, these crystallins are made and then retained throughout life, making them extremely stable proteins. Mammalian lens crystallins are divided into alpha, beta, and gamma families; beta and gamma crystallins are also considered as a superfamily. Alpha and beta families are further divided into acidic and basic groups. Seven protein regions exist in crystallins: four homologous motifs, a connecting peptide, and N- and C-terminal extensions. Gamma-crystallins are a homogeneous group of highly symmetrical, monomeric proteins typically lacking connecting peptides and terminal extensions. They are differentially regulated after early development. This gene encodes a protein initially considered to be a beta-crystallin but the encoded protein is monomeric and has greater sequence similarity to other gamma-crystallins. This gene encodes the most significant gamma-crystallin in adult eye lens tissue. Whether due to aging or mutations in specific genes, gamma-crystallins have been involved in cataract formation. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]


This gene encodes an adhesive junction associated protein of the armadillo/beta-catenin superfamily and is implicated in brain and eye development and cancer formation. The protein encoded by this gene promotes the disruption of E-cadherin based adherens junction to favor cell spreading upon stimulation by hepatocyte growth factor. This gene is overexpressed in prostate adenocarcinomas and is associated with decreased expression of tumor suppressor E-cadherin in this tissue. This gene resides in a region of the short arm of chromosome 5 that is deleted in Cri du Chat syndrome. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants encoding different isoforms. [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2013]










This gene encodes a member of the cytochrome P450 superfamily of enzymes. The cytochrome P450 proteins are monooxygenases which catalyze many reactions involved in drug metabolism and synthesis of cholesterol, steroids and other lipids. This mitochondrial protein oxidizes cholesterol intermediates as part of the bile synthesis pathway. Since the conversion of cholesterol to bile acids is the major route for removing cholesterol from the body, this protein is important for overall cholesterol homeostasis. Mutations in this gene cause cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, a rare autosomal recessive lipid storage disease. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]

This gene encodes an inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP)-binding protein. The encoded mitochondrial protein enters the cytosol when cells undergo apoptosis, and allows activation of caspases by binding to inhibitor of apoptosis proteins. Overexpression of the encoded protein sensitizes tumor cells to apoptosis. A mutation in this gene is associated with young-adult onset of nonsyndromic deafness-64. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants encoding different isoforms. [provided by RefSeq, May 2013]
This gene encodes a member of the bicoid sub-family of homeodomain-containing transcription factors. The encoded protein acts as a transcription factor and may play a role in brain and sensory organ development. Two transcript variants encoding distinct isoforms have been identified for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
The protein encoded by this gene is a serine-threonine kinase that is closely related to other kinases that interact with members of the Rho family of small GTPases. Substrates for this enzyme include myogenin, the beta-subunit of the L-type calcium channels, and phospholemman. The 3' untranslated region of this gene contains 5-38 copies of a CTG trinucleotide repeat. Expansion of this unstable motif to 50-5,000 copies causes myotonic dystrophy type I, which increases in severity with increasing repeat element copy number. Repeat expansion is associated with condensation of local chromatin structure that disrupts the expression of genes in this region. Several alternatively spliced transcript variants of this gene have been described, but the full-length nature of some of these variants has not been determined. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2016]
This gene encodes a member of a small family of transcription factors that function through binding of DP interaction partner proteins. The encoded protein recognizes a specific sequence motif in DNA and interacts directly with the retinoblastoma protein (pRB) to regulate the expression of genes involved in the cell cycle. Altered copy number and activity of this gene have been observed in a number of human cancers. There are pseudogenes for this gene on chromosomes 2 and 17. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Mar 2013]
Ephrin-A5, a member of the ephrin gene family, prevents axon bundling in cocultures of cortical neurons with astrocytes, a model of late stage nervous system development and differentiation. The EPH and EPH-related receptors comprise the largest subfamily of receptor protein-tyrosine kinases and have been implicated in mediating developmental events, particularly in the nervous system. EPH receptors typically have a single kinase domain and an extracellular region containing a Cys-rich domain and 2 fibronectin type III repeats. The ephrin ligands and receptors have been named by the Eph Nomenclature Committee (1997). Based on their structures and sequence relationships, ephrins are divided into the ephrin-A (EFNA) class, which are anchored to the membrane by a glycosylphosphatidylinositol linkage, and the ephrin-B (EFNB) class, which are transmembrane proteins. The Eph family of receptors are similarly divided into 2 groups based on the similarity of their extracellular domain sequences and their affinities for binding ephrin-A and ephrin-B ligands. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene encodes the adenovirus E1A-associated cellular p300 transcriptional co-activator protein. It functions as histone acetyltransferase that regulates transcription via chromatin remodeling and is important in the processes of cell proliferation and differentiation. It mediates cAMP-gene regulation by binding specifically to phosphorylated CREB protein. This gene has also been identified as a co-activator of HIF1A (hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha), and thus plays a role in the stimulation of hypoxia-induced genes such as VEGF. Defects in this gene are a cause of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome and may also play a role in epithelial cancer. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene belongs to the ephrin receptor subfamily of the protein-tyrosine kinase family. EPH and EPH-related receptors have been implicated in mediating developmental events, particularly in the nervous system. Receptors in the EPH subfamily typically have a single kinase domain and an extracellular region containing a Cys-rich domain and 2 fibronectin type III repeats. The ephrin receptors are divided into 2 groups based on the similarity of their extracellular domain sequences and their affinities for binding ephrin-A and ephrin-B ligands. This gene encodes a protein that binds ephrin-A ligands. Mutations in this gene are the cause of certain genetically-related cataract disorders.[provided by RefSeq, May 2010]
The product of this gene functions in the nucleotide excision repair pathway, and is required for the repair of DNA lesions such as those induced by UV light or formed by electrophilic compounds including cisplatin. The encoded protein forms a heterodimer with the XPF endonuclease (also known as ERCC4), and the heterodimeric endonuclease catalyzes the 5' incision in the process of excising the DNA lesion. The heterodimeric endonuclease is also involved in recombinational DNA repair and in the repair of inter-strand crosslinks. Mutations in this gene result in cerebrooculofacioskeletal syndrome, and polymorphisms that alter expression of this gene may play a role in carcinogenesis. Multiple transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been found for this gene. The last exon of this gene overlaps with the CD3e molecule, epsilon associated protein gene on the opposite strand. [provided by RefSeq, Oct 2009]
The nucleotide excision repair pathway is a mechanism to repair damage to DNA. The protein encoded by this gene is involved in transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair and is an integral member of the basal transcription factor BTF2/TFIIH complex. The gene product has ATP-dependent DNA helicase activity and belongs to the RAD3/XPD subfamily of helicases. Defects in this gene can result in three different disorders, the cancer-prone syndrome xeroderma pigmentosum complementation group D, trichothiodystrophy, and Cockayne syndrome. Alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Aug 2008]
This gene encodes a DNA-binding protein that is important in transcription-coupled excision repair. The encoded protein has ATP-stimulated ATPase activity, interacts with several transcription and excision repair proteins, and may promote complex formation at DNA repair sites. Mutations in this gene are associated with Cockayne syndrome type B and cerebrooculofacioskeletal syndrome 1. Alternative splicing occurs between a splice site from exon 5 of this gene to the 3' splice site upstream of the open reading frame (ORF) of the adjacent gene, piggyback-derived-3 (GeneID:267004), which activates the alternative polyadenylation site downstream of the piggyback-derived-3 ORF. The resulting transcripts encode a fusion protein that shares sequence with the product of each individual gene. [provided by RefSeq, Mar 2016]
This gene encodes an estrogen receptor, a ligand-activated transcription factor composed of several domains important for hormone binding, DNA binding, and activation of transcription. The protein localizes to the nucleus where it may form a homodimer or a heterodimer with estrogen receptor 2. Estrogen and its receptors are essential for sexual development and reproductive function, but also play a role in other tissues such as bone. Estrogen receptors are also involved in pathological processes including breast cancer, endometrial cancer, and osteoporosis. Alternative promoter usage and alternative splicing result in dozens of transcript variants, but the full-length nature of many of these variants has not been determined. [provided by RefSeq, Mar 2014]
This gene encodes a member of the family of estrogen receptors and superfamily of nuclear receptor transcription factors. The gene product contains an N-terminal DNA binding domain and C-terminal ligand binding domain and is localized to the nucleus, cytoplasm, and mitochondria. Upon binding to 17beta-estradiol or related ligands, the encoded protein forms homo- or hetero-dimers that interact with specific DNA sequences to activate transcription. Some isoforms dominantly inhibit the activity of other estrogen receptor family members. Several alternatively spliced transcript variants of this gene have been described, but the full-length nature of some of these variants has not been fully characterized. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene encodes a protein with a trypsin-like cysteine/serine peptidase domain in the C-terminus. Mutations in this gene are associated with an autosomal dominant form of hereditary fibrosing poikiloderma (HFP). Affected individuals display mottled pigmentation, telangiectasia, epidermal atrophy, tendon contractures, and progressive pulmonary fibrosis. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants encoding distinct isoforms. A paralog of this gene which also has a trypsin&#8208;like peptidase domain, FAM111A, is located only 16 kb from this gene on human chromosome 11q12.1. [provided by RefSeq, Apr 2014]
The protein encoded by this gene may play a part in the beta-catenin/Lef signaling pathway. Expression of this gene is down-regulated by beta-catenin. Defects in this gene are a cause of hypomyelination with congenital cataract (HCC). [provided by RefSeq, Oct 2008]
This gene encodes a member of the F-box protein family, which are characterized by an approximately 40 amino acid motif, the F-box. F-box proteins constitute one subunit of modular E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes, called SCF complexes, which function in phosphorylation-dependent ubiquitination. The F-box domain mediates protein-protein interactions and binds directly to S-phase kinase-associated protein 1. In addition to an F-box domain, the encoded protein contains at least 9 tandem leucine-rich repeats. The ubiquitin ligase complex containing the encoded protein may function in cell-cycle control by regulating levels of lysine-specific demethylase 4A. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2013]
This gene encodes fibronectin, a glycoprotein present in a soluble dimeric form in plasma, and in a dimeric or multimeric form at the cell surface and in extracellular matrix. The encoded preproprotein is proteolytically processed to generate the mature protein. Fibronectin is involved in cell adhesion and migration processes including embryogenesis, wound healing, blood coagulation, host defense, and metastasis. The gene has three regions subject to alternative splicing, with the potential to produce 20 different transcript variants, at least one of which encodes an isoform that undergoes proteolytic processing. The full-length nature of some variants has not been determined. [provided by RefSeq, Jan 2016]

This intronless gene belongs to the forkhead family of transcription factors, which is characterized by a distinct forkhead domain. The protein encoded functions as a lens-specific transcription factor and plays an important role in vertebrate lens formation. Mutations in this gene are associated with anterior segment mesenchymal dysgenesis and congenital primary aphakia. [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2009]
This gene encodes the light subunit of the ferritin protein. Ferritin is the major intracellular iron storage protein in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. It is composed of 24 subunits of the heavy and light ferritin chains. Variation in ferritin subunit composition may affect the rates of iron uptake and release in different tissues. A major function of ferritin is the storage of iron in a soluble and nontoxic state. Defects in this light chain ferritin gene are associated with several neurodegenerative diseases and hyperferritinemia-cataract syndrome. This gene has multiple pseudogenes. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene is a nuclear protein of the AlkB related non-haem iron and 2-oxoglutarate-dependent oxygenase superfamily but the exact physiological function of this gene is not known. Other non-heme iron enzymes function to reverse alkylated DNA and RNA damage by oxidative demethylation. Studies in mice and humans indicate a role in nervous and cardiovascular systems and a strong association with body mass index, obesity risk, and type 2 diabetes. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2011]
This gene encodes a protein that contains a RUN domain, FYVE-type zinc finger domain and Golgi dynamics (GOLD) domain. The encoded protein plays a role in microtubule plus end-directed transport of autophagic vesicles through interactions with the small GTPase Rab7, phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate (PI3P) and the autophagosome marker LC3. Mutations in this gene are a cause of autosomal recessive congenital cataract-2 (CATC2). [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2011]
This gene encodes glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. This protein is a cytosolic enzyme encoded by a housekeeping X-linked gene whose main function is to produce NADPH, a key electron donor in the defense against oxidizing agents and in reductive biosynthetic reactions. G6PD is remarkable for its genetic diversity. Many variants of G6PD, mostly produced from missense mutations, have been described with wide ranging levels of enzyme activity and associated clinical symptoms. G6PD deficiency may cause neonatal jaundice, acute hemolysis, or severe chronic non-spherocytic hemolytic anemia. Two transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
Galactokinase is a major enzyme for the metabolism of galactose and its deficiency causes congenital cataracts during infancy and presenile cataracts in the adult population. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
Galactose-1-phosphate uridyl transferase (GALT) catalyzes the second step of the Leloir pathway of galactose metabolism, namely the conversion of UDP-glucose + galactose-1-phosphate to glucose-1-phosphate + UDP-galactose. The absence of this enzyme results in classic galactosemia in humans and can be fatal in the newborn period if lactose is not removed from the diet. The pathophysiology of galactosemia has not been clearly defined. Two transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Apr 2012]
This gene encodes a member of the cytoskeletal BTB/kelch (Broad-Complex, Tramtrack and Bric a brac) repeat family. The encoded protein plays a role in neurofilament architecture and is involved in mediating the ubiquitination and degradation of some proteins. Defects in this gene are a cause of giant axonal neuropathy (GAN). [provided by RefSeq, Oct 2008]
This gene encodes the enzyme responsible for formation of the blood group I antigen. The i and I antigens are distinguished by linear and branched poly-N-acetyllactosaminoglycans, respectively. The encoded protein is the I-branching enzyme, a beta-1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase responsible for the conversion of fetal i antigen to adult I antigen in erythrocytes during embryonic development. Mutations in this gene have been associated with adult i blood group phenotype. Alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been described. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
The hepatotrophic factor designated augmenter of liver regeneration (ALR) is thought to be one of the factors responsible for the extraordinary regenerative capacity of mammalian liver. It has also been called hepatic regenerative stimulation substance (HSS). The gene resides on chromosome 16 in the interval containing the locus for polycystic kidney disease (PKD1). The putative gene product is 42% similar to the scERV1 protein of yeast. The yeast scERV1 gene had been found to be essential for oxidative phosphorylation, the maintenance of mitochondrial genomes, and the cell division cycle. The human gene is both the structural and functional homolog of the yeast scERV1 gene. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
The protein encoded by this gene is a connexin and is a component of lens fiber gap junctions. Defects in this gene are a cause of zonular pulverulent cataract type 3 (CZP3). [provided by RefSeq, Jan 2010]
This gene encodes a transmembrane connexin protein that is necessary for lens growth and maturation of lens fiber cells. The encoded protein is a component of gap junction channels and functions in a calcium and pH-dependent manner. Mutations in this gene have been associated with zonular pulverulent cataracts, nuclear progressive cataracts, and cataract-microcornea syndrome. [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2009]

Cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans are composed of a membrane-associated protein core substituted with a variable number of heparan sulfate chains. Members of the glypican-related integral membrane proteoglycan family (GRIPS) contain a core protein anchored to the cytoplasmic membrane via a glycosyl phosphatidylinositol linkage. These proteins may play a role in the control of cell division and growth regulation. The protein encoded by this gene can bind to and inhibit the dipeptidyl peptidase activity of CD26, and it can induce apoptosis in certain cell types. Deletion mutations in this gene are associated with Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome, also known as Simpson dysmorphia syndrome. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Sep 2009]
Cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans are composed of a membrane-associated protein core substituted with a variable number of heparan sulfate chains. Members of the glypican-related integral membrane proteoglycan family (GRIPS) contain a core protein anchored to the cytoplasmic membrane via a glycosyl phosphatidylinositol linkage.  These proteins may play a role in the control of cell division and growth regulation.  The GPC4 gene is adjacent to the 3' end of GPC3 and may also play a role in Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
The protein encoded by this gene belongs to the glutathione peroxidase family, members of which catalyze the reduction of organic hydroperoxides and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) by glutathione, and thereby protect cells against oxidative damage. Other studies indicate that H2O2 is also essential for growth-factor mediated signal transduction, mitochondrial function, and maintenance of thiol redox-balance; therefore, by limiting H2O2 accumulation, glutathione peroxidases are also involved in modulating these processes. Several isozymes of this gene family exist in vertebrates, which vary in cellular location and substrate specificity. This isozyme is the most abundant, is ubiquitously expressed and localized in the cytoplasm, and whose preferred substrate is hydrogen peroxide. It is also a selenoprotein, containing the rare amino acid selenocysteine (Sec) at its active site. Sec is encoded by the UGA codon, which normally signals translation termination. The 3' UTRs of selenoprotein mRNAs contain a conserved stem-loop structure, designated the Sec insertion sequence (SECIS) element, that is necessary for the recognition of UGA as a Sec codon, rather than as a stop signal. This gene contains an in-frame GCG trinucleotide repeat in the coding region, and three alleles with 4, 5 or 6 repeats have been found in the human population. The allele with 4 GCG repeats has been significantly associated with breast cancer risk in premenopausal women. Alternatively spliced transcript variants have been found for this gene. Pseudogenes of this locus have been identified on chromosomes X and 21. [provided by RefSeq, Aug 2017]
Cytosolic and membrane-bound forms of glutathione S-transferase are encoded by two distinct supergene families. These enzymes are involved in cellular defense against toxic, carcinogenic, and pharmacologically active electrophilic compounds. At present, eight distinct classes of the soluble cytoplasmic mammalian glutathione S-transferases have been identified: alpha, kappa, mu, omega, pi, sigma, theta and zeta. This gene encodes a glutathione S-tranferase belonging to the alpha class. The alpha class genes, which are located in a cluster on chromosome 6, are highly related and encode enzymes with glutathione peroxidase activity that function in the detoxification of lipid peroxidation products. Reactive electrophiles produced by oxidative metabolism have been linked to a number of degenerative diseases including Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, cataract formation, and atherosclerosis. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
Cytosolic and membrane-bound forms of glutathione S-transferase are encoded by two distinct supergene families. At present, eight distinct classes of the soluble cytoplasmic mammalian glutathione S-transferases have been identified: alpha, kappa, mu, omega, pi, sigma, theta and zeta. This gene encodes a glutathione S-transferase that belongs to the mu class. The mu class of enzymes functions in the detoxification of electrophilic compounds, including carcinogens, therapeutic drugs, environmental toxins and products of oxidative stress, by conjugation with glutathione. The genes encoding the mu class of enzymes are organized in a gene cluster on chromosome 1p13.3 and are known to be highly polymorphic. These genetic variations can change an individual's susceptibility to carcinogens and toxins as well as affect the toxicity and efficacy of certain drugs. Null mutations of this class mu gene have been linked with an increase in a number of cancers, likely due to an increased susceptibility to environmental toxins and carcinogens. Multiple protein isoforms are encoded by transcript variants of this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
The protein encoded by this gene is an omega class glutathione S-transferase (GST). GSTs are involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics and carcinogens. Four transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been found for this gene.[provided by RefSeq, Jul 2010]
Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are a family of enzymes that play an important role in detoxification by catalyzing the conjugation of many hydrophobic and electrophilic compounds with reduced glutathione. Based on their biochemical, immunologic, and structural properties, the soluble GSTs are categorized into 4 main classes: alpha, mu, pi, and theta. This GST family member is a polymorphic gene encoding active, functionally different GSTP1 variant proteins that are thought to function in xenobiotic metabolism and play a role in susceptibility to cancer, and other diseases. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
The protein encoded by this gene, glutathione S-transferase (GST) theta 1 (GSTT1), is a member of a superfamily of proteins that catalyze the conjugation of reduced glutathione to a variety of electrophilic and hydrophobic compounds. Human GSTs can be divided into five main classes: alpha, mu, pi, theta, and zeta. The theta class includes GSTT1, GSTT2, and GSTT2B. GSTT1 and GSTT2/GSTT2B share 55% amino acid sequence identity and may play a role in human carcinogenesis. The GSTT1 gene is haplotype-specific and is absent from 38% of the population. Alternative splicing of this gene results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Sep 2015]
This gene is located in an imprinted region of chromosome 11 near the insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) gene. This gene is only expressed from the maternally-inherited chromosome, whereas IGF2 is only expressed from the paternally-inherited chromosome. The product of this gene is a long non-coding RNA which functions as a tumor suppressor. Mutations in this gene have been associated with Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome and Wilms tumorigenesis. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Apr 2015]
The product of this gene is a membrane-associated protein that functions in clathrin-mediated endocytosis and protein trafficking within the cell. The encoded protein binds to the huntingtin protein in the brain; this interaction is lost in Huntington's disease. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2013]
Heat-shock transcription factors (HSFs) activate heat-shock response genes under conditions of heat or other stresses. HSF4 lacks the carboxyl-terminal hydrophobic repeat which is shared among all vertebrate HSFs and has been suggested to be involved in the negative regulation of DNA binding activity. Two alternatively spliced transcripts encoding distinct isoforms and possessing different transcriptional activity have been described. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This intronless gene encodes a 70kDa heat shock protein which is a member of the heat shock protein 70 family. In conjuction with other heat shock proteins, this protein stabilizes existing proteins against aggregation and mediates the folding of newly translated proteins in the cytosol and in organelles. It is also involved in the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway through interaction with the AU-rich element RNA-binding protein 1. The gene is located in the major histocompatibility complex class III region, in a cluster with two closely related genes which encode similar proteins. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases catalyze the aminoacylation of tRNA by their cognate amino acid. Because of their central role in linking amino acids with nucleotide triplets contained in tRNAS, aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases are thought to be among the first proteins that appeared in evolution. Two forms of isoleucine-tRNA synthetase exist, a cytoplasmic form and a mitochondrial form. This gene encodes the mitochondrial isoleucine-tRNA synthetase which belongs to the class-I aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase family. [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2014]
This gene encodes a cell surface glycoprotein which is typically expressed on endothelial cells and cells of the immune system. It binds to integrins of type CD11a / CD18, or CD11b / CD18 and is also exploited by Rhinovirus as a receptor. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene encodes indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) - a heme enzyme that catalyzes the first and rate-limiting step in tryptophan catabolism to N-formyl-kynurenine. This enzyme acts on multiple tryptophan substrates including D-tryptophan, L-tryptophan, 5-hydroxy-tryptophan, tryptamine, and serotonin. This enzyme is thought to play a role in a variety of pathophysiological processes such as antimicrobial and antitumor defense, neuropathology, immunoregulation, and antioxidant activity. Through its expression in dendritic cells, monocytes, and macrophages this enzyme modulates T-cell behavior by its peri-cellular catabolization of the essential amino acid tryptophan.[provided by RefSeq, Feb 2011]
This gene encodes a member of the insulin family of polypeptide growth factors, which are involved in development and growth. It is an imprinted gene, expressed only from the paternal allele, and epigenetic changes at this locus are associated with Wilms tumour, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, rhabdomyosarcoma, and Silver-Russell syndrome. A read-through INS-IGF2 gene exists, whose 5' region overlaps the INS gene and the 3' region overlaps this gene. Alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Oct 2010]
Potassium channels represent the most complex class of voltage-gated ion channels from both functional and structural standpoints. Their diverse functions include regulating neurotransmitter release, heart rate, insulin secretion, neuronal excitability, epithelial electrolyte transport, smooth muscle contraction, and cell volume. Four sequence-related potassium channel genes - shaker, shaw, shab, and shal - have been identified in Drosophila, and each has been shown to have human homolog(s). This gene encodes a member of the potassium channel, voltage-gated, shaker-related subfamily. This member includes distinct isoforms which are encoded by alternatively spliced transcript variants of this gene. Some of these isoforms are beta subunits, which form heteromultimeric complexes with alpha subunits and modulate the activity of the pore-forming alpha subunits. [provided by RefSeq, Apr 2015]
This gene encodes a member of the inwardly rectifying potassium channel family of proteins. Members of this family form ion channel pores that allow potassium ions to pass into a cell. The encoded protein belongs to a subfamily of low signal channel conductance proteins that have a low dependence on potassium concentration. Mutations in this gene are associated with snowflake vitreoretinal degeneration. Alternate splicing results in multiple transcript variants.[provided by RefSeq, Feb 2010]
Human chromosomal region 11p15.5 contains two clusters of epigenetically-regulated genes that are expressed from only one chromosome in a parent-of-origin manner. Each cluster, or imprinted domain, is regulated by a functionally independent imprinting control region (ICR). The human CDKN1C/KCNQ1OT1 domain is regulated by an ICR located in an intron of KCNQ1, and contains at least eight genes that are expressed exclusively or preferentially from the maternally-inherited allele. The DNA of the ICR is specifically methylated on the maternally-inherited chromosome, and unmethylated on the paternally-inherited chromosome. The ICR contains the promoter of the KCNQ1OT1 gene that is exclusively expressed from the paternal allele. The KCNQ1OT1 transcript is the antisense to the KCNQ1 gene and is a unspliced long non-coding RNA. It interacts with chromatin and regulates transcription of multiple target genes through epigenetic modifications. The transcript is abnormally expressed from both chromosomes in most patients with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, and the transcript also plays an important role in colorectal carcinogenesis. [provided by RefSeq, Apr 2012]
This gene encodes a protein containing KELCH-1 like domains, as well as a BTB/POZ domain. Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 interacts with NF-E2-related factor 2 in a redox-sensitive manner and the dissociation of the proteins in the cytoplasm is followed by transportation of NF-E2-related factor 2 to the nucleus. This interaction results in the expression of the catalytic subunit of gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase. Two alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding the same isoform have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
Conventional kinesin is a tetrameric molecule composed of two heavy chains and two light chains, and transports various cargos along microtubules toward their plus ends. The heavy chains provide the motor activity, while the light chains bind to various cargos. This gene encodes a member of the kinesin light chain family. It associates with kinesin heavy chain through an N-terminal domain, and six tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) motifs are thought to be involved in binding of cargos such as vesicles, mitochondria, and the Golgi complex. Thus, kinesin light chains function as adapter molecules and not motors per se. Although previously named 
The protein encoded by this gene belongs to the glycosyl hydrolase 1 family of proteins. The encoded preproprotein is proteolytically processed to generate the mature enzyme. This enzyme is integral to the plasma membrane and has both phlorizin hydrolase activity and lactase activity. Mutations in this gene are associated with congenital lactase deficiency. Polymorphisms in this gene are associated with lactase persistence, in which intestinal lactase activity persists at childhood levels into adulthood. [provided by RefSeq, Jan 2016]
This gene encodes a LEM domain-containing transmembrane protein of the inner nuclear membrane. The protein is involved in nuclear structure organization and plays a role in cell signaling and differentiation. Mutations in this gene result in Cataract 46, juvenile-onset. Multiple transcript variants have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Feb 2017]
This gene encodes a protein with similarity to the GS I members of the glutamine synthetase superfamily. The encoded protein is referred to as a pseudo-glutamine synthetase because it has no glutamine synthesis activity and may function as a chaperone protein. This protein is localized to the lens and may be associated with cataract disease. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Jan 2009]
This gene encodes an eye lens-specific protein found at the junctions of lens fiber cells, where it may contribute to cell junctional organization. It acts as a receptor for calmodulin, and may play an important role in both lens development and cataractogenesis. Mutations in this gene have been associated with cataract formation. Alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been found for this gene.[provided by RefSeq, Sep 2009]
The protein encoded by this gene is involved in generating and maintaining the asymmetric distribution of channels and receptors at the cell membrane. The encoded protein also is required for the localization of some specific channels and can be part of a protein complex that couples synaptic vesicle exocytosis to cell adhesion in the brain. [provided by RefSeq, May 2016]

The nuclear lamina consists of a two-dimensional matrix of proteins located next to the inner nuclear membrane. The lamin family of proteins make up the matrix and are highly conserved in evolution. During mitosis, the lamina matrix is reversibly disassembled as the lamin proteins are phosphorylated. Lamin proteins are thought to be involved in nuclear stability, chromatin structure and gene expression. Vertebrate lamins consist of two types, A and B. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. Mutations in this gene lead to several diseases: Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, familial partial lipodystrophy, limb girdle muscular dystrophy, dilated cardiomyopathy, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, and Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. [provided by RefSeq, Apr 2012]
The protein encoded by this gene catalyzes the conversion of (S)-2,3 oxidosqualene to lanosterol. The encoded protein is a member of the terpene cyclase/mutase family and catalyzes the first step in the biosynthesis of cholesterol, steroid hormones, and vitamin D. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants encoding different isoforms.[provided by RefSeq, Feb 2009]
The protein encoded by this gene is a DNA-binding, leucine zipper-containing transcription factor that acts as a homodimer or as a heterodimer. Depending on the binding site and binding partner, the encoded protein can be a transcriptional activator or repressor. This protein plays a role in the regulation of several cellular processes, including embryonic lens fiber cell development, increased T-cell susceptibility to apoptosis, and chondrocyte terminal differentiation. Defects in this gene are a cause of juvenile-onset pulverulent cataract as well as congenital cerulean cataract 4 (CCA4). Two transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Jan 2010]
This gene produces a precursor transcript from which a long non-coding RNA is derived by RNase P cleavage of a tRNA-like small ncRNA (known as mascRNA) from its 3' end. The resultant mature transcript lacks a canonical poly(A) tail but is instead stabilized by a 3' triple helical structure. This transcript is retained in the nucleus where it is thought to form molecular scaffolds for ribonucleoprotein complexes. It may act as a transcriptional regulator for numerous genes, including some genes involved in cancer metastasis and cell migration, and it is involved in cell cycle regulation. Its upregulation in multiple cancerous tissues has been associated with the proliferation and metastasis of tumor cells. [provided by RefSeq, Mar 2015]
The protein encoded by this gene is a serine/threonine kinase and is part of some signal transduction cascades, including the ERK and JNK kinase pathways as well as the NF-kappa-B pathway. The encoded protein is activated by autophosphorylation and requires magnesium as a cofactor in phosphorylating other proteins. This protein has E3 ligase activity conferred by a plant homeodomain (PHD) in its N-terminus and phospho-kinase activity conferred by a kinase domain in its C-terminus. [provided by RefSeq, Mar 2012]
The protein encoded by this gene is a member of the MAP kinase family. MAP kinases act as an integration point for multiple biochemical signals, and are involved in a wide variety of cellular processes such as proliferation, differentiation, transcription regulation and development. This kinase is activated by various environmental stresses and proinflammatory cytokines. The activation requires its phosphorylation by MAP kinase kinases (MKKs), or its autophosphorylation triggered by the interaction of MAP3K7IP1/TAB1 protein with this kinase. The substrates of this kinase include transcription regulator ATF2, MEF2C, and MAX, cell cycle regulator CDC25B, and tumor suppressor p53, which suggest the roles of this kinase in stress related transcription and cell cycle regulation, as well as in genotoxic stress response. Four alternatively spliced transcript variants of this gene encoding distinct isoforms have been reported. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]

This locus encodes a member of the MADS box transcription enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) family of proteins, which play a role in myogenesis. The encoded protein, MEF2 polypeptide C, has both trans-activating and DNA binding activities. This protein may play a role in maintaining the differentiated state of muscle cells. Mutations and deletions at this locus have been associated with severe cognitive disability, stereotypic movements, epilepsy, and cerebral malformation. Alternatively spliced transcript variants have been described. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2010]
Major intrinsic protein is a member of the water-transporting aquaporins as well as the original member of the MIP family of channel proteins. The function of the fiber cell membrane protein encoded by this gene is undetermined, yet this protein is speculated to play a role in intracellular communication. The MIP protein is expressed in the ocular lens and is required for correct lens function. This gene has been mapped among aquaporins AQP2, AQP5, and AQP6, in a potential gene cluster at 12q13. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
microRNAs (miRNAs) are short (20-24 nt) non-coding RNAs that are involved in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in multicellular organisms by affecting both the stability and translation of mRNAs. miRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II as part of capped and polyadenylated primary transcripts (pri-miRNAs) that can be either protein-coding or non-coding. The primary transcript is cleaved by the Drosha ribonuclease III enzyme to produce an approximately 70-nt stem-loop precursor miRNA (pre-miRNA), which is further cleaved by the cytoplasmic Dicer ribonuclease to generate the mature miRNA and antisense miRNA star (miRNA*) products. The mature miRNA is incorporated into a RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), which recognizes target mRNAs through imperfect base pairing with the miRNA and most commonly results in translational inhibition or destabilization of the target mRNA. The RefSeq represents the predicted microRNA stem-loop. [provided by RefSeq, Sep 2009]
microRNAs (miRNAs) are short (20-24 nt) non-coding RNAs that are involved in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in multicellular organisms by affecting both the stability and translation of target mRNAs. This microRNA represents the most abundant miRNA in the corneal and lens epithelia of the eye and has been shown to interfere with target binding by another miRNA, miR-205. Through regulation of the VEGF and Akt signaling pathways, this microRNA may inhibit corneal angiogenesis. Mutations in the seed region of this microRNA cause familial keratoconus with cataract, also known as EDICT syndrome. [provided by RefSeq, Mar 2017]
microRNAs (miRNAs) are short (20-24 nt) non-coding RNAs that are involved in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in multicellular organisms by affecting both the stability and translation of mRNAs. miRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II as part of capped and polyadenylated primary transcripts (pri-miRNAs) that can be either protein-coding or non-coding. The primary transcript is cleaved by the Drosha ribonuclease III enzyme to produce an approximately 70-nt stem-loop precursor miRNA (pre-miRNA), which is further cleaved by the cytoplasmic Dicer ribonuclease to generate the mature miRNA and antisense miRNA star (miRNA*) products. The mature miRNA is incorporated into a RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), which recognizes target mRNAs through imperfect base pairing with the miRNA and most commonly results in translational inhibition or destabilization of the target mRNA. The RefSeq represents the predicted microRNA stem-loop. [provided by RefSeq, Sep 2009]
microRNAs (miRNAs) are short (20-24 nt) non-coding RNAs that are involved in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in multicellular organisms by affecting both the stability and translation of mRNAs. miRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II as part of capped and polyadenylated primary transcripts (pri-miRNAs) that can be either protein-coding or non-coding. The primary transcript is cleaved by the Drosha ribonuclease III enzyme to produce an approximately 70-nt stem-loop precursor miRNA (pre-miRNA), which is further cleaved by the cytoplasmic Dicer ribonuclease to generate the mature miRNA and antisense miRNA star (miRNA*) products. The mature miRNA is incorporated into a RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), which recognizes target mRNAs through imperfect base pairing with the miRNA and most commonly results in translational inhibition or destabilization of the target mRNA. The RefSeq represents the predicted microRNA stem-loop. [provided by RefSeq, Sep 2009]
microRNAs (miRNAs) are short (20-24 nt) non-coding RNAs that are involved in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in multicellular organisms by affecting both the stability and translation of mRNAs. miRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II as part of capped and polyadenylated primary transcripts (pri-miRNAs) that can be either protein-coding or non-coding. The primary transcript is cleaved by the Drosha ribonuclease III enzyme to produce an approximately 70-nt stem-loop precursor miRNA (pre-miRNA), which is further cleaved by the cytoplasmic Dicer ribonuclease to generate the mature miRNA and antisense miRNA star (miRNA*) products. The mature miRNA is incorporated into a RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), which recognizes target mRNAs through imperfect base pairing with the miRNA and most commonly results in translational inhibition or destabilization of the target mRNA. The RefSeq represents the predicted microRNA stem-loop. [provided by RefSeq, Sep 2009]
microRNAs (miRNAs) are short (20-24 nt) non-coding RNAs that are involved in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in multicellular organisms by affecting both the stability and translation of mRNAs. miRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II as part of capped and polyadenylated primary transcripts (pri-miRNAs) that can be either protein-coding or non-coding. The primary transcript is cleaved by the Drosha ribonuclease III enzyme to produce an approximately 70-nt stem-loop precursor miRNA (pre-miRNA), which is further cleaved by the cytoplasmic Dicer ribonuclease to generate the mature miRNA and antisense miRNA star (miRNA*) products. The mature miRNA is incorporated into a RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), which recognizes target mRNAs through imperfect base pairing with the miRNA and most commonly results in translational inhibition or destabilization of the target mRNA. The RefSeq represents the predicted microRNA stem-loop. [provided by RefSeq, Sep 2009]
microRNAs (miRNAs) are short (20-24 nt) non-coding RNAs that are involved in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in multicellular organisms by affecting both the stability and translation of mRNAs. miRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II as part of capped and polyadenylated primary transcripts (pri-miRNAs) that can be either protein-coding or non-coding. The primary transcript is cleaved by the Drosha ribonuclease III enzyme to produce an approximately 70-nt stem-loop precursor miRNA (pre-miRNA), which is further cleaved by the cytoplasmic Dicer ribonuclease to generate the mature miRNA and antisense miRNA star (miRNA*) products. The mature miRNA is incorporated into a RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), which recognizes target mRNAs through imperfect base pairing with the miRNA and most commonly results in translational inhibition or destabilization of the target mRNA. The RefSeq represents the predicted microRNA stem-loop. [provided by RefSeq, Sep 2009]
The protein encoded by this gene is involved in the translocation of cobalamin into the mitochondrion, where it is used in the final steps of adenosylcobalamin synthesis. Adenosylcobalamin is a coenzyme required for the activity of methylmalonyl-CoA mutase. Defects in this gene are a cause of methylmalonic aciduria. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
microRNAs (miRNAs) are short (20-24 nt) non-coding RNAs that are involved in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in multicellular organisms by affecting both the stability and translation of mRNAs. miRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II as part of capped and polyadenylated primary transcripts (pri-miRNAs) that can be either protein-coding or non-coding. The primary transcript is cleaved by the Drosha ribonuclease III enzyme to produce an approximately 70-nt stem-loop precursor miRNA (pre-miRNA), which is further cleaved by the cytoplasmic Dicer ribonuclease to generate the mature miRNA and antisense miRNA star (miRNA*) products. The mature miRNA is incorporated into a RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), which recognizes target mRNAs through imperfect base pairing with the miRNA and most commonly results in translational inhibition or destabilization of the target mRNA. The encoded miRNA is one of five members of the miR-30 family of highly conserved miRNAs and participates in many cellular processes. It has additionally been implicated in the development of several types of cancer. The RefSeq represents the predicted microRNA stem-loop. [provided by RefSeq, Sep 2017]
This gene encodes a protein that catalyzes the final step in the conversion of vitamin B(12) into adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl), a vitamin B12-containing coenzyme for methylmalonyl-CoA mutase. Mutations in the gene are the cause of vitamin B12-dependent methylmalonic aciduria linked to the cblB complementation group. Alternatively spliced transcript variants have been found. [provided by RefSeq, Apr 2011]
Meningioma 1 (MN1) contains two sets of CAG repeats. It is disrupted by a balanced translocation (4;22) in a meningioma, and its inactivation may contribute to meningioma 32 pathogenesis. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
Sterol-C4-mehtyl oxidase-like protein was isolated based on its similarity to the yeast ERG25 protein. It contains a set of putative metal binding motifs with similarity to that seen in a family of membrane desaturases-hydroxylases. The protein is localized to the endoplasmic reticulum membrane and is believed to function in cholesterol biosynthesis. Alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding distinct isoforms have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene encodes a ubiquitous and highly conserved protein that carries out the enzymatic reduction of methionine sulfoxide to methionine. Human and animal studies have shown the highest levels of expression in kidney and nervous tissue. The protein functions in the repair of oxidatively damaged proteins to restore biological activity. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, May 2014]
The protein encoded by this gene catalyzes the conversion of 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate to 5-methyltetrahydrofolate, a co-substrate for homocysteine remethylation to methionine. Genetic variation in this gene influences susceptibility to occlusive vascular disease, neural tube defects, colon cancer and acute leukemia, and mutations in this gene are associated with methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase deficiency.[provided by RefSeq, Oct 2009]
This gene encodes the peroxisomal enzyme mevalonate kinase. Mevalonate is a key intermediate, and mevalonate kinase a key early enzyme, in isoprenoid and sterol synthesis. Mevalonate kinase deficiency caused by mutation of this gene results in mevalonic aciduria, a disease characterized psychomotor retardation, failure to thrive, hepatosplenomegaly, anemia and recurrent febrile crises. Defects in this gene also cause hyperimmunoglobulinaemia D and periodic fever syndrome, a disorder characterized by recurrent episodes of fever associated with lymphadenopathy, arthralgia, gastrointestinal dismay and skin rash. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2014]
Cardiac muscle myosin is a hexamer consisting of two heavy chain subunits, two light chain subunits, and two regulatory subunits. This gene encodes the alpha heavy chain subunit of cardiac myosin. The gene is located approximately 4kb downstream of the gene encoding the beta heavy chain subunit of cardiac myosin. Mutations in this gene cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and atrial septal defect 3. [provided by RefSeq, Feb 2017]
This gene encodes a conventional non-muscle myosin; this protein should not be confused with the unconventional myosin-9a or 9b (MYO9A or MYO9B). The encoded protein is a myosin IIA heavy chain that contains an IQ domain and a myosin head-like domain which is involved in several important functions, including cytokinesis, cell motility and maintenance of cell shape. Defects in this gene have been associated with non-syndromic sensorineural deafness autosomal dominant type 17, Epstein syndrome, Alport syndrome with macrothrombocytopenia, Sebastian syndrome, Fechtner syndrome and macrothrombocytopenia with progressive sensorineural deafness. [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2011]
This gene encodes an enzyme that functions to both activate and deactivate arylamine and hydrazine drugs and carcinogens. Polymorphisms in this gene are responsible for the N-acetylation polymorphism in which human populations segregate into rapid, intermediate, and slow acetylator phenotypes. Polymorphisms in this gene are also associated with higher incidences of cancer and drug toxicity. A second arylamine N-acetyltransferase gene (NAT1) is located near this gene (NAT2). [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene is a member of the N-myc downregulated gene family which belongs to the alpha/beta hydrolase superfamily. The protein encoded by this gene is a cytoplasmic protein that may play a role in neurite outgrowth. This gene may be involved in glioblastoma carcinogenesis. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Aug 2017]
This gene encodes a protein containing four conserved nuclear localization signals. The encoded protein functions in eye, tooth, craniofacial and brain development, and it can regulate actin remodeling and cell morphology. Mutations in this gene have been shown to cause Nance-Horan syndrome, and also X-linked cataract-40. Alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been described for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, May 2014]
Nitric oxide is a reactive free radical which acts as a biologic mediator in several processes, including neurotransmission and antimicrobial and antitumoral activities. This gene encodes a nitric oxide synthase which is expressed in liver and is inducible by a combination of lipopolysaccharide and certain cytokines. Three related pseudogenes are located within the Smith-Magenis syndrome region on chromosome 17. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a disease that leads to blindness by degeneration of cone photoreceptors. Rods produce factors required for cone viability. The protein encoded by this gene is one of those factors and is similar to a truncated form of thioredoxin. This gene has been proposed to have therapeutic value against RP. [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2015]
This gene encodes an inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase. This protein is involved in regulating membrane trafficking and is located in numerous subcellular locations including the trans-Golgi network, clathrin-coated vesicles and, endosomes and the plasma membrane. This protein may also play a role in primary cilium formation. Mutations in this gene cause oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe and also Dent disease. Alternate splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Jan 2016]
This gene encodes the enzyme responsible for the excision of 8-oxoguanine, a mutagenic base byproduct which occurs as a result of exposure to reactive oxygen. The action of this enzyme includes lyase activity for chain cleavage. Alternative splicing of the C-terminal region of this gene classifies splice variants into two major groups, type 1 and type 2, depending on the last exon of the sequence. Type 1 alternative splice variants end with exon 7 and type 2 end with exon 8. All variants share the N-terminal region in common, which contains a mitochondrial targeting signal that is essential for mitochondrial localization. Many alternative splice variants for this gene have been described, but the full-length nature for every variant has not been determined. [provided by RefSeq, Aug 2008]
The mouse ortholog of this protein co-purifies with the mitochondrial inner membrane. Mutations in this gene have been shown to result in 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type III and autosomal dominant optic atrophy and cataract. Multiple transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Oct 2009]
This gene encodes a member of the prolyl 3-hydroxylase subfamily of 2-oxo-glutarate-dependent dioxygenases. These enzymes play a critical role in collagen chain assembly, stability and cross-linking by catalyzing post-translational 3-hydroxylation of proline residues. Mutations in this gene are associated with nonsyndromic severe myopia with cataract and vitreoretinal degeneration, and downregulation of this gene may play a role in breast cancer. Alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding multiple isoforms have been observed for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2011]
This gene encodes a chromatin-associated enzyme, poly(ADP-ribosyl)transferase, which modifies various nuclear proteins by poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation. The modification is dependent on DNA and is involved in the regulation of various important cellular processes such as differentiation, proliferation, and tumor transformation and also in the regulation of the molecular events involved in the recovery of cell from DNA damage. In addition, this enzyme may be the site of mutation in Fanconi anemia, and may participate in the pathophysiology of type I diabetes. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene encodes paired box protein Pax-6, one of many human homologs of the Drosophila melanogaster gene prd. In addition to a conserved paired box domain, a hallmark feature of this gene family, the encoded protein also contains a homeobox domain. Both domains are known to bind DNA and function as regulators of gene transcription. Activity of this protein is key in the development of neural tissues, particularly the eye. This gene is regulated by multiple enhancers located up to hundreds of kilobases distant from this locus. Mutations in this gene or in the enhancer regions can cause ocular disorders such as aniridia and Peter's anomaly. Use of alternate promoters and alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants encoding different isoforms. Interestingly, inclusion of a particular alternate coding exon has been shown to increase the length of the paired box domain and alter its DNA binding specificity. Consequently, isoforms that carry the shorter paired box domain regulate a different set of genes compared to the isoforms carrying the longer paired box domain. [provided by RefSeq, Mar 2019]
The protein encoded by this gene is found in the nucleus and is a cofactor of DNA polymerase delta. The encoded protein acts as a homotrimer and helps increase the processivity of leading strand synthesis during DNA replication. In response to DNA damage, this protein is ubiquitinated and is involved in the RAD6-dependent DNA repair pathway. Two transcript variants encoding the same protein have been found for this gene. Pseudogenes of this gene have been described on chromosome 4 and on the X chromosome. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
The protein encoded by this gene belongs to the cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase family. It plays a role in signal transduction by regulating the intracellular concentration of cyclic nucleotides. This protein can hydrolyze both cAMP and cGMP to the corresponding nucleoside 5' monophosphate, but has higher affinity for cAMP, and is more efficient with cAMP as substrate. Alternatively spliced transcript variants have been described for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2011]
This gene encodes a member of the RIEG/PITX homeobox family, which is in the bicoid class of homeodomain proteins. Members of this family act as transcription factors. This protein is involved in lens formation during eye development. Mutations of this gene have been associated with anterior segment mesenchymal dysgenesis and congenital cataracts. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
The protein encoded by this gene is a DNA polymerase involved in base excision and repair, also called gap-filling DNA synthesis. The encoded protein, acting as a monomer, is normally found in the cytoplasm, but it translocates to the nucleus upon DNA damage. Several transcript variants of this gene exist, but the full-length nature of only one has been described to date. [provided by RefSeq, Sep 2011]
This gene encodes a member of the paraoxonase family of enzymes and exhibits lactonase and ester hydrolase activity. Following synthesis in the kidney and liver, the enzyme is secreted into the circulation, where it binds to high density lipoprotein (HDL) particles and hydrolyzes thiolactones and xenobiotics, including paraoxon, a metabolite of the insecticide parathion. Polymorphisms in this gene may be associated with coronary artery disease and diabetic retinopathy. The gene is found in a cluster of three related paraoxonase genes on chromosome 7. [provided by RefSeq, Aug 2017]
This gene encodes a member of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) family. The encoded protein is thought to function as an integrator of transcriptional repression and nuclear receptor signaling. It may inhibit the ligand-induced transcriptional activity of peroxisome proliferator activated receptors alpha and gamma, though evidence for this effect is inconsistent. Expression of this gene in colorectal cancer cells may be variable but is typically relatively low. Knockout studies in mice suggested a role for this protein in myelination of the corpus callosum, lipid metabolism, differentiation, and epidermal cell proliferation. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants encoding distinct protein isoforms. [provided by RefSeq, Aug 2017]
The protein encoded by this gene is a member of the LAR protein-tyrosine phosphatase-interacting protein (liprin) family. Liprins interact with members of LAR family of transmembrane protein tyrosine phosphatases, which are known to be important for axon guidance and mammary gland development. It has been proposed that liprins are multivalent proteins that form complex structures and act as scaffolds for the recruitment and anchoring of LAR family of tyrosine phosphatases. This protein has been shown to bind the calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine protein kinase (MAGUK family) protein (also known as CASK) and proposed to regulate higher-order brain functions in mammals. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Sep 2013]
The protein encoded by this gene is one of the three catalytic subunits of protein phosphatase 1 (PP1). PP1 is a serine/threonine specific protein phosphatase known to be involved in the regulation of a variety of cellular processes, such as cell division, glycogen metabolism, muscle contractility, protein synthesis, and HIV-1 viral transcription. Increased PP1 activity has been observed in the end stage of heart failure. Studies in both human and mice suggest that PP1 is an important regulator of cardiac function. Mouse studies also suggest that PP1 functions as a suppressor of learning and memory. Three alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene encodes the phosphatase 2A catalytic subunit. Protein phosphatase 2A is one of the four major Ser/Thr phosphatases, and it is implicated in the negative control of cell growth and division. It consists of a common heteromeric core enzyme, which is composed of a catalytic subunit and a constant regulatory subunit, that associates with a variety of regulatory subunits. This gene encodes an alpha isoform of the catalytic subunit. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene encodes a mitochondrial protein with antioxidant function. The protein is similar to the C22 subunit of Salmonella typhimurium alkylhydroperoxide reductase, and it can rescue bacterial resistance to alkylhydroperoxide in E. coli that lack the C22 subunit. The human and mouse genes are highly conserved, and they map to the regions syntenic between mouse and human chromosomes. Sequence comparisons with recently cloned mammalian homologs suggest that these genes consist of a family that is responsible for the regulation of cellular proliferation, differentiation and antioxidant functions. This family member can protect cells from oxidative stress, and it can promote cell survival in prostate cancer. Alternative splicing of this gene results in multiple transcript variants. Related pseudogenes have been identified on chromosomes 1, 3, 13 and 22. [provided by RefSeq, Oct 2014]
This gene encodes a protein involved in peripheral nerve myelin upkeep. The encoded protein contains 2 PDZ domains which were named after PSD95 (post synaptic density protein), DlgA (Drosophila disc large tumor suppressor), and ZO1 (a mammalian tight junction protein). Two alternatively spliced transcript variants have been described for this gene which encode different protein isoforms and which are targeted differently in the Schwann cell. Mutations in this gene cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuoropathy, type 4F and Dejerine-Sottas neuropathy. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
The protein encoded by this gene is a member of the protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) family. PTPs are known to be signaling molecules that regulate a variety of cellular processes including cell growth, differentiation, mitotic cycle, and oncogenic transformation. This PTP possesses an extracellular region, a single transmembrane region, and two tandem intracellular catalytic domains, and thus represents a receptor-type PTP. The extracellular region contains a meprin-A5 antigen-PTP (MAM) domain, Ig-like and fibronectin type III-like repeats. The protein domain structure and the expression pattern of the mouse counterpart of this PTP suggest its roles in both signal transduction and cellular adhesion in the central nervous system. Two alternatively spliced transcript variants of this gene, which encode distinct proteins, have been reported. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene encodes a heme-containing peroxidase that is secreted into the extracellular matrix. It is involved in extracellular matrix formation, and may function in the physiological and pathological fibrogenic response in fibrotic kidney. Mutations in this gene cause corneal opacification and other ocular anomalies, and also microphthalmia and anterior segment dysgenesis. [provided by RefSeq, Aug 2014]
The protein encoded by this gene is a member of a family of Ras-related small GTPases that regulate membrane trafficking in organelles and transport vesicles. Knockdown studies is zebrafish suggest that this protein may have a role in eye and brain development. Mutations in this gene are associated with Warburg micro syndrome type 3. Alternatively spliced transcript variants have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Jan 2012]
This gene encodes the catalytic subunit of a Rab GTPase activating protein. The encoded protein forms a heterodimer with a non-catalytic subunit to specifically regulate the activity of members of the Rab3 subfamily of small G proteins. This protein mediates the hydrolysis of GTP bound Rab3 to the GDP bound form. Mutations in this gene are associated with Warburg micro syndrome. Alternate splicing results in multiple transcript variants.[provided by RefSeq, Feb 2010]
The protein encoded by this gene belongs to the RAB3 protein family, members of which are involved in regulated exocytosis of neurotransmitters and hormones. This protein forms the Rab3 GTPase-activating complex with RAB3GAP1, where it constitutes the regulatory subunit, whereas the latter functions as the catalytic subunit. This gene has the highest level of expression in the brain, consistent with it having a key role in neurodevelopment. Mutations in this gene are associated with Martsolf syndrome.[provided by RefSeq, Oct 2009]
The protein encoded by this gene is a highly conserved, calcium-binding protein, that is preferentially expressed in the liver and kidney. It may have an important role in calcium homeostasis. Studies in rat indicate that this protein may also play a role in aging, as it shows age-associated down-regulation. This gene is part of a gene cluster on chromosome Xp11.3-Xp11.23. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Sep 2013]
This gene encodes a member of the RGS (regulator of G protein signaling) family of proteins, which are defined by the presence of a RGS domain that confers the GTPase-activating activity of these proteins toward certain G alpha subunits. This protein also belongs to a subfamily of RGS proteins characterized by the presence of DEP and GGL domains, the latter a G beta 5-interacting domain. The RGS proteins negatively regulate G protein signaling, and may modulate neuronal, cardiovascular, lymphocytic activities, and cancer risk. Many alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding different isoforms with long or short N-terminal domains, complete or incomplete GGL domains, and distinct C-terminal domains, have been described for this gene, however, the full-length nature of some of these variants is not known.[provided by RefSeq, Mar 2011]
The protein encoded by this gene is found in cytokine-stimulated endothelial cells and is thought to be responsible for the accumulation of blood leukocytes at sites of inflammation by mediating the adhesion of cells to the vascular lining. It exhibits structural features such as the presence of lectin- and EGF-like domains followed by short consensus repeat (SCR) domains that contain 6 conserved cysteine residues. These proteins are part of the selectin family of cell adhesion molecules. Adhesion molecules participate in the interaction between leukocytes and the endothelium and appear to be involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene encodes a cell surface adhesion molecule that belongs to a family of adhesion/homing receptors. The encoded protein contains a C-type lectin-like domain, a calcium-binding epidermal growth factor-like domain, and two short complement-like repeats. The gene product is required for binding and subsequent rolling of leucocytes on endothelial cells, facilitating their migration into secondary lymphoid organs and inflammation sites. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms in this gene have been associated with various diseases including immunoglobulin A nephropathy. Alternatively spliced transcript variants have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Oct 2009]
This gene encodes a 140 kDa protein that is stored in the alpha-granules of platelets and Weibel-Palade bodies of endothelial cells. This protein redistributes to the plasma membrane during platelet activation and degranulation and mediates the interaction of activated endothelial cells or platelets with leukocytes. The membrane protein is a calcium-dependent receptor that binds to sialylated forms of Lewis blood group carbohydrate antigens on neutrophils and monocytes. Alternative splice variants may occur but are not well documented. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene belongs to the signal induced proliferation associated 1 family of genes, which encode GTPase-activating proteins specific for the GTP-binding protein Rap1. Rap1 has been implicated in regulation of cell adhesion, cell polarity, and organization of the cytoskeleton. Like other members of the family, the protein encoded by this gene contains RapGAP and PDZ domains. In addition, this protein contains a C-terminal leucine zipper domain. This gene is proposed to function in epithelial cell morphogenesis and establishment or maintenance of polarity. Consistently, expression of the protein in cell culture showed localization to cell-cell borders in apical regions, and downregulation of the gene in 3D Caco2 cell culture resulted in abnormal cell polarity and morphogenesis. Allelic variants of this gene have been associated with congenital cataracts in humans. [provided by RefSeq, Feb 2016]
This gene encodes a member of the sirtuin family of proteins, homologs to the yeast Sir2 protein. Members of the sirtuin family are characterized by a sirtuin core domain and grouped into four classes. The functions of human sirtuins have not yet been determined; however, yeast sirtuin proteins are known to regulate epigenetic gene silencing and suppress recombination of rDNA. Studies suggest that the human sirtuins may function as intracellular regulatory proteins with mono-ADP-ribosyltransferase activity. The protein encoded by this gene is included in class I of the sirtuin family. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2008]
The protein encoded by this gene is a homeobox protein that is similar to the Drosophila 'sine oculis' gene product. This gene is found in a cluster of related genes on chromosome 14 and is thought to be involved in eye development. Defects in this gene are a cause of isolated microphthalmia with cataract type 2 (MCOPCT2). [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene encodes a transmembrane transporter that likely plays a role in monocarboxylic acid transport. A mutation in this gene has been associated with juvenile cataracts with microcornea and renal glucosuria. [provided by RefSeq, Mar 2010]
This gene encodes a sodium bicarbonate cotransporter (NBC) involved in the regulation of bicarbonate secretion and absorption and intracellular pH. Mutations in this gene are associated with proximal renal tubular acidosis. Multiple transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Oct 2008]
The protein encoded by this gene is a plasma membrane protein whose function is to transport creatine into and out of cells. Defects in this gene can result in X-linked creatine deficiency syndrome. Multiple transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2008]
The Drosophila embryonic protein snail is a zinc finger transcriptional repressor which downregulates the expression of ectodermal genes within the mesoderm. The nuclear protein encoded by this gene is structurally similar to the Drosophila snail protein, and is also thought to be critical for mesoderm formation in the developing embryo. At least two variants of a similar processed pseudogene have been found on chromosome 2. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
The protein encoded by this gene binds copper and zinc ions and is one of two isozymes responsible for destroying free superoxide radicals in the body. The encoded isozyme is a soluble cytoplasmic protein, acting as a homodimer to convert naturally-occuring but harmful superoxide radicals to molecular oxygen and hydrogen peroxide. The other isozyme is a mitochondrial protein. Mutations in this gene have been implicated as causes of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Rare transcript variants have been reported for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene is a member of the iron/manganese superoxide dismutase family. It encodes a mitochondrial protein that forms a homotetramer and binds one manganese ion per subunit. This protein binds to the superoxide byproducts of oxidative phosphorylation and converts them to hydrogen peroxide and diatomic oxygen. Mutations in this gene have been associated with idiopathic cardiomyopathy (IDC), premature aging, sporadic motor neuron disease, and cancer. Alternative splicing of this gene results in multiple transcript variants. A related pseudogene has been identified on chromosome 1. [provided by RefSeq, Apr 2016]
This gene encodes a member of the superoxide dismutase (SOD) protein family. SODs are antioxidant enzymes that catalyze the conversion of superoxide radicals into hydrogen peroxide and oxygen, which may protect the brain, lungs, and other tissues from oxidative stress. Proteolytic processing of the encoded protein results in the formation of two distinct homotetramers that differ in their ability to interact with the extracellular matrix (ECM). Homotetramers consisting of the intact protein, or type C subunit, exhibit high affinity for heparin and are anchored to the ECM. Homotetramers consisting of a proteolytically cleaved form of the protein, or type A subunit, exhibit low affinity for heparin and do not interact with the ECM. A mutation in this gene may be associated with increased heart disease risk. [provided by RefSeq, Oct 2015]
The gene is a member of the syntaxin family. The encoded protein is targeted to the apical membrane of epithelial cells where it forms clusters and is important in establishing and maintaining polarity necessary for protein trafficking involving vesicle fusion and exocytosis. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, May 2010]
This gene encodes a protein that belongs to a family of GTPase activator proteins of Rab-like small GTPases. The encoded protein and its cognate GTPase, Rab1, bind the nonstructural protein 5A (NS5A) of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) to mediate viral replication. Depletion of this protein inhibits replication of the virus and HCV infection. Mutations in this gene are associated with Warburg micro syndrome 4. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Mar 2014]
The protein encoded by this gene belongs to the Tudor family of proteins. This protein contains conserved Tudor domains and LOTUS domains. It is a component of RNA granules, which function in RNA processing. Mutations in this gene have been associated with cataract formation in mouse and human. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Nov 2014]
This gene encodes a secreted ligand of the TGF-beta (transforming growth factor-beta) superfamily of proteins. Ligands of this family bind various TGF-beta receptors leading to recruitment and activation of SMAD family transcription factors that regulate gene expression. The encoded preproprotein is proteolytically processed to generate a latency-associated peptide (LAP) and a mature peptide, and is found in either a latent form composed of a mature peptide homodimer, a LAP homodimer, and a latent TGF-beta binding protein, or in an active form consisting solely of the mature peptide homodimer. The mature peptide may also form heterodimers with other TGFB family members. This encoded protein regulates cell proliferation, differentiation and growth, and can modulate expression and activation of other growth factors including interferon gamma and tumor necrosis factor alpha. This gene is frequently upregulated in tumor cells, and mutations in this gene result in Camurati-Engelmann disease. [provided by RefSeq, Aug 2016]
This gene encodes a secreted ligand of the TGF-beta (transforming growth factor-beta) superfamily of proteins. Ligands of this family bind various TGF-beta receptors leading to recruitment and activation of SMAD family transcription factors that regulate gene expression. The encoded preproprotein is proteolytically processed to generate a latency-associated peptide (LAP) and a mature peptide, and is found in either a latent form composed of a mature peptide homodimer, a LAP homodimer, and a latent TGF-beta binding protein, or in an active form consisting solely of the mature peptide homodimer. The mature peptide may also form heterodimers with other TGF-beta family members. Disruption of the TGF-beta/SMAD pathway has been implicated in a variety of human cancers. A chromosomal translocation that includes this gene is associated with Peters' anomaly, a congenital defect of the anterior chamber of the eye. Mutations in this gene may be associated with Loeys-Dietz syndrome. This gene encodes multiple isoforms that may undergo similar proteolytic processing. [provided by RefSeq, Aug 2016]
This gene encodes a secreted ligand of the TGF-beta (transforming growth factor-beta) superfamily of proteins. Ligands of this family bind various TGF-beta receptors leading to recruitment and activation of SMAD family transcription factors that regulate gene expression. The encoded preproprotein is proteolytically processed to generate a latency-associated peptide (LAP) and a mature peptide, and is found in either a latent form composed of a mature peptide homodimer, a LAP homodimer, and a latent TGF-beta binding protein, or in an active form consisting solely of the mature peptide homodimer. The mature peptide may also form heterodimers with other TGF-beta family members. This protein is involved in embryogenesis and cell differentiation, and may play a role in wound healing. Mutations in this gene are a cause of aortic aneurysms and dissections, as well as familial arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia 1. [provided by RefSeq, Aug 2016]
This gene encodes a member of the monovalent cation:proton antiporter 2 (CPA2) family of transporter proteins. Members of this family typically couple the export of monovalent cations, such as potassium or sodium, to the import of protons across cellular membranes. Mutations in this gene have been identified in patients with a rare inherited vision defect, cornea guttata with anterior polar cataract. [provided by RefSeq, Mar 2017]
This gene encodes a glycosylated transmembrane protein that plays a role in lens and eye development. Mutations in this gene, including a t(16;22)(p13.3;q11.2) translocation, are associated with congenital and juvenile cataract disorders. Alternative splicing of this gene results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Feb 2014]


This gene encodes a tumor suppressor protein containing transcriptional activation, DNA binding, and oligomerization domains. The encoded protein responds to diverse cellular stresses to regulate expression of target genes, thereby inducing cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, senescence, DNA repair, or changes in metabolism. Mutations in this gene are associated with a variety of human cancers, including hereditary cancers such as Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Alternative splicing of this gene and the use of alternate promoters result in multiple transcript variants and isoforms. Additional isoforms have also been shown to result from the use of alternate translation initiation codons from identical transcript variants (PMIDs: 12032546, 20937277). [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2016]
The product of this gene belongs to the family of transient receptor potential (TRP) channels. TRP channels are cation-selective channels important for cellular calcium signaling and homeostasis. The protein encoded by this gene mediates calcium entry, and this entry is potentiated by calcium store depletion. Alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been identified. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene produces a long non-coding RNA that interacts with the Polycomb repressor complex and functions in the epigenetic regulation of transcription. This RNA promotes cell proliferation and is upregulated in tumor cells. It may act as a sponge for microRNAs. The homologous mouse gene is required for differentiation of retina. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2017]
The protein encoded by this gene belongs to the peptidase C12 family. This enzyme is a thiol protease that hydrolyzes a peptide bond at the C-terminal glycine of ubiquitin. This gene is specifically expressed in the neurons and in cells of the diffuse neuroendocrine system. Mutations in this gene may be associated with Parkinson disease.[provided by RefSeq, Sep 2009]
This gene encodes a co-chaperone required for folding and accumulation of type II myosins. The protein consists of three tetratricopeptide repeat motifs at the N-terminus that form a complex with heat shock protein 90, a central region of unknown function that is conserved in all Unc-45 proteins, and a C-terminal Unc-45/Cro1/She4 domain. The protein is expressed at high levels in striated muscle, where its muscle myosin chaperone activity is dependent on heat shock protein 90 acting as a co-chaperone. A missense mutation in this gene has been associated with cataract development. Alternative splicing results in multiple transcript variants. [provided by RefSeq, Apr 2015]
This gene is a member of the aggrecan/versican proteoglycan family. The protein encoded is a large chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan and is a major component of the extracellular matrix. This protein is involved in cell adhesion, proliferation, proliferation, migration and angiogenesis and plays a central role in tissue morphogenesis and maintenance. Mutations in this gene are the cause of Wagner syndrome type 1. Multiple transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Aug 2009]
This gene is a member of the PDGF/VEGF growth factor family. It encodes a heparin-binding protein, which exists as a disulfide-linked homodimer. This growth factor induces proliferation and migration of vascular endothelial cells, and is essential for both physiological and pathological angiogenesis. Disruption of this gene in mice resulted in abnormal embryonic blood vessel formation. This gene is upregulated in many known tumors and its expression is correlated with tumor stage and progression. Elevated levels of this protein are found in patients with POEMS syndrome, also known as Crow-Fukase syndrome. Allelic variants of this gene have been associated with microvascular complications of diabetes 1 (MVCD1) and atherosclerosis. Alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been described. There is also evidence for alternative translation initiation from upstream non-AUG (CUG) codons resulting in additional isoforms. A recent study showed that a C-terminally extended isoform is produced by use of an alternative in-frame translation termination codon via a stop codon readthrough mechanism, and that this isoform is antiangiogenic. Expression of some isoforms derived from the AUG start codon is regulated by a small upstream open reading frame, which is located within an internal ribosome entry site. [provided by RefSeq, Nov 2015]
This gene encodes a type III intermediate filament protein. Intermediate filaments, along with microtubules and actin microfilaments, make up the cytoskeleton. The encoded protein is responsible for maintaining cell shape and integrity of the cytoplasm, and stabilizing cytoskeletal interactions. This protein is involved in neuritogenesis and cholesterol transport and functions as an organizer of a number of other critical proteins involved in cell attachment, migration, and signaling. Bacterial and viral pathogens have been shown to attach to this protein on the host cell surface. Mutations in this gene are associated with congenital cataracts in human patients. [provided by RefSeq, Aug 2017]
This gene encodes a transmembrane protein, which is located primarily in the endoplasmic reticulum and ubiquitously expressed with highest levels in brain, pancreas, heart, and insulinoma beta-cell lines. Mutations in this gene are associated with Wolfram syndrome, also called DIDMOAD (Diabetes Insipidus, Diabetes Mellitus, Optic Atrophy, and Deafness), an autosomal recessive disorder. The disease affects the brain and central nervous system. Mutations in this gene can also cause autosomal dominant deafness 6 (DFNA6), also known as DFNA14 or DFNA38. Alternatively spliced transcript variants have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Mar 2009]
The WNT gene family consists of structurally related genes which encode secreted signaling proteins. These proteins have been implicated in oncogenesis and in several developmental processes, including regulation of cell fate and patterning during embryogenesis. This gene is a member of the WNT gene family. It encodes a protein which shows 98% amino acid identity to mouse Wnt3 protein, and 84% to human WNT3A protein, another WNT gene product. The mouse studies show the requirement of Wnt3 in primary axis formation in the mouse. Studies of the gene expression suggest that this gene may play a key role in some cases of human breast, rectal, lung, and gastric cancer through activation of the WNT-beta-catenin-TCF signaling pathway. This gene is clustered with WNT15, another family member, in the chromosome 17q21 region. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
This gene encodes a member of the RecQ subfamily of DNA helicase proteins. The encoded nuclear protein is important in the maintenance of genome stability and plays a role in DNA repair, replication, transcription and telomere maintenance. This protein contains a N-terminal 3' to 5' exonuclease domain, an ATP-dependent helicase domain and RQC (RecQ helicase conserved region) domain in its central region, and a C-terminal HRDC (helicase RNase D C-terminal) domain and nuclear localization signal. Defects in this gene are the cause of Werner syndrome, an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by accelerated aging and an elevated risk for certain cancers. [provided by RefSeq, Aug 2017]
This gene encodes a transcription factor that contains four zinc-finger motifs at the C-terminus and a proline/glutamine-rich DNA-binding domain at the N-terminus. It has an essential role in the normal development of the urogenital system, and it is mutated in a small subset of patients with Wilms tumor. This gene exhibits complex tissue-specific and polymorphic imprinting pattern, with biallelic, and monoallelic expression from the maternal and paternal alleles in different tissues. Multiple transcript variants have been described. In several variants, there is evidence for the use of a non-AUG (CUG) translation initiation codon upstream of, and in-frame with the first AUG. Authors of PMID:7926762 also provide evidence that WT1 mRNA undergoes RNA editing in human and rat, and that this process is tissue-restricted and developmentally regulated. [provided by RefSeq, Mar 2015]
The protein encoded by this gene is a key component of the XPC complex, which plays an important role in the early steps of global genome nucleotide excision repair (NER). The encoded protein is important for damage sensing and DNA binding, and shows a preference for single-stranded DNA. Mutations in this gene or some other NER components can result in Xeroderma pigmentosum, a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by increased sensitivity to sunlight with the development of carcinomas at an early age. Alternatively spliced transcript variants have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Aug 2017]
The protein encoded by this gene is involved in the efficient repair of DNA single-strand breaks formed by exposure to ionizing radiation and alkylating agents. This protein interacts with DNA ligase III, polymerase beta and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase to participate in the base excision repair pathway. It may play a role in DNA processing during meiogenesis and recombination in germ cells. A rare microsatellite polymorphism in this gene is associated with cancer in patients of varying radiosensitivity. [provided by RefSeq, Jul 2008]
The protein encoded by this gene is an isoform of xylosyltransferase, which belongs to a family of glycosyltransferases. This enzyme transfers xylose from UDP-xylose to specific serine residues of the core protein and initiates the biosynthesis of glycosaminoglycan chains in proteoglycans including chondroitin sulfate, heparan sulfate, heparin and dermatan sulfate. The enzyme activity, which is increased in scleroderma patients, is a diagnostic marker for the determination of sclerotic activity in systemic sclerosis. Alternatively spliced transcript variants have been found for this gene. [provided by RefSeq, Dec 2013]
The protein encoded by this gene is a member of the Zfh1 family of 2-handed zinc finger/homeodomain proteins. It is located in the nucleus and functions as a DNA-binding transcriptional repressor that interacts with activated SMADs. Mutations in this gene are associated with Hirschsprung disease/Mowat-Wilson syndrome. Alternatively spliced transcript variants have been found for this gene.[provided by RefSeq, Jan 2010]

